GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: The Taliban gains
ground in a key strategic
district
in Afghanistan, while American
troops are killed in an attack
near the largest U.S.
military facility
in the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Monday, we talk politics and
look at some of highlights
from the latest
Democratic debate.
GWEN IFILL: And a look at the
new bluegrass musical "Bright
Star" by comedian Steve Martin
and musician Edie Brickell.
STEVE MARTIN, "Bright Star": My
part of the song was written on
the banjo. And the banjo
lays out a certain way for the
melodies to be played. And --
but I also like the sound
of the banjo for this musical,
because I find the banjo very
provocative.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. military
has suffered its worst single
day in Afghanistan in a
year-and-a-half.
Six soldiers were killed and two
wounded today in a Taliban
attack. It was the strongest
sign yet of the militants'
resurgence. We will have details
and a full report on the
state of the fight against the
Taliban right after the news
summary.
GWEN IFILL: President Obama now
says there's legitimate
criticism of his efforts to
battle
the Islamic State group. In a
year-end interview with NPR
airing today, he said he's
failed
to keep the public fully
informed about thousands of
airstrikes and recaptured
territory. The
president also urged Americans
to keep the threat in
perspective.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: While I
understand why people are
worried,
the most damage they can do,
though, is if they start
changing how we live and what
our
values are. And part of my
message over the next 14 months
or 13 months that I remain
in office is to just make sure
we remember who we are and make
sure that our resilience,
our values, our unity
are maintained.
GWEN IFILL: The president also
criticized Republican
presidential candidates who've
accused him of not doing enough
to fight terror. He said it's
important not just to shoot,
but to aim.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The man who
allegedly bought the weapons
used in the San Bernardino
shootings
was ordered held without bond
today. Enrique Marquez is
accused of conspiring to aid
terrorists,
among other federal charges.
Authorities say he bought the
assault-style rifles that Syed
Farook and Tashfeen Malik fired
at a holiday party, killing 14
people.
GWEN IFILL: The first of six
Baltimore police officers in the
Freddie Gray case will go
on trial next June 13 for a
second time. A judge set the new
date today for officer William
Porter on manslaughter, assault
and other charges. His first
trial ended last week in
a hung jury. Gray died in
custody last April, touching off
violent protests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: World soccer
moved to rid itself today of two
leaders engulfed in a corruption
scandal. The leader of the
sport's governing body, FIFA,
Sepp Blatter and his heir
apparent,
were banned for eight years. It
stems from a payment of more
than $2 million that's now
part of a criminal probe.
Steve Scott of Independent
Television News has our report.
STEVE SCOTT: Unshaven, with a
plaster covering the
after-effects of some minor
surgery, Sepp
Blatter fought his way through
the attention to deliver a
typically defiant message
shortly
after hearing of his
eight-year ban.
JOSEPH "SEPP" BLATTER, Former
President, FIFA: I'm really
sorry. I am sorry. I am sorry
that
I am still somewhere a punching
ball, that I am sorry that I am,
as president of FIFA,
this punching ball, and I'm
sorry for pro football. But I'm
also sorry about me.
STEVE SCOTT: Sepp Blatter claims
the 1.3 million pounds payment
to Michel Platini in 2011 was
part of a salary deal between
the pair in 1998. Platini,
Blatter's adviser at the time,
agreed to take some of the wages
then and guest the rest later.
Blatter claims the 2011
payout settled that debt, but
FIFA rules that it breached its
ethics code, as the payment
wasn't correctly accounted
for in FIFA's books.
For Platini, the consequences of
today's verdict could not be
worse. Six months ago, the
front-runner
to take over the presidency,
that ambition now looks dead. He
said today: "The FIFA ethics
commission's procedure against
me is a true mockery. It was
orchestrated to tarnish my
reputation."
While Blatter will now not get
the dignified handover of power
he so wanted, muted or not,
he won't give up.
JOSEPH "SEPP" BLATTER: But I
will fight. I will fight for me
and I will fight for FIFA.
Suspended eight years, for what?
But I will be back. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Switzerland's
attorney general is
investigating the case. They're
also looking
into alleged corruption in
FIFA's award of the next two
World Cup finals to Russia and
Qatar.
GWEN IFILL: Rescuers in Southern
China have spent a second day
digging through a mudslide,
searching for 85 missing people.
Buildings crumbled as a pile of
excavated dirt and construction
waste, 330 feet high, collapsed
Sunday at an industrial park in
Shenzhen. It buried
or damaged 33 buildings,
including factories, offices and
dormitories. At least 16 people
were injured, but no deaths
have been confirmed yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Spain braced
today for weeks of political
limbo, after no party won
outright
in Sunday's election. The ruling
Conservatives celebrated winning
the most votes, but failed
to keep their majority in
Parliament. And left-wing
parties are refusing to join in
a coalition. Spain has been
roiled by a backlash over
austerity and by unemployment
that tops
20 percent. The country's stock
market dropped 3 percent today
on the election outcome.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, gay and bisexual men
will be able to donate blood
for the first time in nearly 30
years. The Food and Drug
Administration ended the ban
today, saying it's not needed to
prevent the transmission of the
AIDS virus. The new policy
still bars donations by men who
have had sex with other men
within the previous 12 months.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Wall Street
managed to recover a little of
its losses from last week.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 123 points to close above
17250. The Nasdaq rose
nearly 46 points, and
the S&P 500 added 15.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour": U.S. and NATO troops
killed in Afghanistan;
Democrats divided over how to
fight ISIS; why health care
co-ops are shutting down;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: Afghanistan
and the deaths of six Americans,
amid a renewed Taliban
offensive.
It happened near Bagram air
field, outside Kabul, when a
suicide bomber drove a
motorcycle
into a joint U.S.-Afghan patrol.
The Bagram attack was even worse
than this one last August, when
three American security
guards died in a suicide attack
in Kabul. And it came just three
days after Secretary
of Defense Ash Carter
was in Afghanistan.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: We have made gains
that will put Afghanistan
on a better path. More work lies
ahead, and the national security
of both our nations
remains very much at stake. But
we will succeed. The Taliban's
advances in some parts of the
country, even if only temporary,
underscore that this is a tough
fight, and it's far from
over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Indeed, Taliban
fighters are pressing the Afghan
army hard across the country.
In late September, the militants
managed a three-day takeover of
Kunduz, a provincial
capital in the north. And now
government forces are falling
back in Helmand Province in the
south.
Officials there say the Taliban
seized the strategically
important Sangin district last
night. More than 90 Afghan
soldiers were killed in Helmand
in two days of fighting. But
some
at least still sounded defiant.
MAN (through translator): The
operation is going on by Afghan
security forces in this
area. The enemies cannot defeat
us. We have a strong resolve to
defeat them and defend
our country, Afghanistan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And they will
have American help for a while
longer. Two months ago,
President
Obama reversed course and
announced that some 5,500 U.S.
troops will stay in Afghanistan
beyond 2016.
Late today, Defense Secretary
Carter said the Bagram attack is
a "painful reminder"
of the dangers U.S. troops face
in Afghanistan. And in a related
development, the U.N. Security
Council voted unanimously today
to extend sanctions against the
Taliban for 18 more
months.
For more on the situation in
Afghanistan, we turn now to
freelance journalist Sune Engel
Rasmussen in Kabul. I spoke
with him a short while ago.
Thanks very much for joining us.
How did this suicide bomber get
close enough to these American
troops to kill them? What
happened?
SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN, Freelance
Journalist: Well, the American
troops were carrying out
a patrol on foot close to Bagram
with a unit of Afghan national
police. And as they were
walking, the suicide bomber
drove up to them on a motorbike
laden with explosives and then
rammed into them and
detonated himself.
And that killed six American
soldiers, is what we're hearing,
and injured another three
and injured three Afghan police.
So, it didn't seem that
difficult for him to get close
to
the soldiers apparently because
they were walking on foot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it common for
U.S. or other NATO troops to be
so vulnerable that way so
close to this big air base?
SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN: Well, I
don't know the details of how
vulnerable they were, but I
know they are conducting
patrols, not just U.S. soldiers,
but also soldiers from other
nations around Bagram.
And this is something they have
doing for a long time and will
probably continue to
do as part of their, train,
advise and assist mission, where
they go out with Afghans and
assist them on the ground.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know
that there are something like
9,800 U.S. troops in Afghanistan
right now. What is their mission
right now? Is it to defend? Is
it to go after the Taliban?
How would you describe it?
SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN: Well, NATO
and the U.S. call it a train,
advise and assist mission.
So, broadly speaking, that means
training the Afghan security
forces to take over security
themselves. Advising is often
also on the ground, for example,
with Afghan special forces,
when they try to the districts
in, for example, southern
Helmand province or in Kunduz,
which
fell a couple of months ago.
And then there's the assist
part, which is a little more
difficult to define exactly
what that is, but that is, for
example, fighting underground
alongside Afghan troops. Now,
the U.S. military says they
don't conduct their own
operation~s, but they are
assisting
the Afghans.
They're also carrying out
airstrikes. They're also
fighting a counterterrorism
mission,
as they say here. Now, that
sometimes veers into what the
rest of us might define as
counterinsurgency,
where they actually go out and
they do patrols in villages that
they think are influenced
-- or where there is a
terrorism presence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I ask because I
think Americans don't hear as
much about what's going on in
Afghanistan. But you mentioned
Helmand province in the south.
The Taliban is putting up quite
a serious fight
there, aren't they?
SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN: They are.
And they have been doing for
quite a while now.
The Taliban launched what they
call a spring fighting season in
the spring, but it's been
going pretty much continually
since then for almost a year
now. Sangin has been contested
for a couple years actually, but
it hasn't been as bad as we have
seen over the past
48 hours now.
Lashkar Gah, the provisional
capital in Helmand, looks
seriously threatened now, as it
hasn't
done at any point actually
during the war. The Taliban have
managed to take a lot of
districts surrounding the
capital. And that's also why we
have seen a recent arrival of
both the U.S. and U.K. special
forces in Helmand to help out
the Afghans secure the province.
Eventually, the Afghans will
have to take control of security
themselves, but both the
regular Afghan forces, but also
the special Afghan forces, which
are actually quite competent
fighting, are stretched in the
province, as it looks now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, very tough,
especially as we get so close to
Christmas.
Sune Engel Rasmussen,
we thank you.
SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN:
You're welcome.
GWEN IFILL: And now it is time
for Politics Monday, following a
busy campaign weekend.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins catches us up,
starting with the strong
contrasts
that emerged in Saturday's
Democrat debate.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Democrats
walked in ready to talk
security. Topic one: how to
fight
the Islamic State. Former
Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton argued the U.S. must
move
Syrian President
Bashar al-Assad out.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: We will
not get the support on the
ground
in Syria to dislodge ISIS if the
fighters there who are not
associated with ISIS, but
whose principal goal is getting
rid of Assad, don't believe
there is a political, diplomatic
channel that is ongoing.
We now have that.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Clinton's
main rival, Vermont Senator
Bernie Sanders, said any focus
on Assad is a distraction.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate: Yes, of
course, Assad is a terrible
dictator.
But I think we have got to get
our foreign policies and
priorities right. The immediate
-- it is not Assad who is
attacking the United States. It
is ISIS.
LISA DESJARDINS: That was an
opening for former Maryland
Governor Martin O'Malley, a
distant
third in the polls, to take
his own swipe at Clinton.
MARTIN O'MALLEY (D),
Presidential Candidate: I
believe that we need to focus on
destroying
ISIL. That is the clear and
present danger. But we shouldn't
be the ones declaring that
Assad must go.
LISA DESJARDINS: Even as her
fellow Democrats differed with
Clinton, some Republican
candidates
agreed with her approach. On
CBS' "Face the Nation" Sunday,
Florida Senator Marco Rubio
called for helping Syrian
rebels oust Assad.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: The
argument that Assad, and we have
no vested
interest, and he's not an enemy
of America is wrong. For
example, Assad is the reason
why there's a refugee crisis.
LISA DESJARDINS: And in a
YouTube video today, another
anti-Assad candidate, South
Carolina
Senator Lindsey Graham, again
stressed the issue, even as he
dropped out of the race.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-SC),
Presidential Candidate: I'm
suspending my campaign, but
never my commitment
to achieving security through
strength for the American
people.
LISA DESJARDINS: Of course,
security wasn't the only topic
at Saturday's debate. Candidates
talked Wall Street as well.
QUESTION: Should corporate
America love Hillary Clinton?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON:
Everybody should.
(LAUGHTER)
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I want
to be the president for the
struggling, the striving and the
successful.
But I also want to create jobs,
and I want to be a partner with
the private sector.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Hillary and
I have a difference. The CEOs of
large multinationals
may like Hillary. They ain't
going to like me and Wall Street
is going to like me even
less.
LISA DESJARDINS: But the two
rivals did have a moment of
detente following news that the
Sanders staff had accessed
secret Clinton data.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Not only do
I apologize to Secretary
Clinton, and I hope we can work
together on an independent
investigation from day one. I
want to apologize to my
supporters.
This is not the type of
campaign that we run.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I very
much appreciate that comment,
Bernie. It really is important
that we go forward on this.
LISA DESJARDINS: The debate drew
more than eight million viewers.
That was on the Saturday
before Christmas. That's less
than half the number that tuned
in for the prime-time GOP
showdown last Tuesday.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: For more about all
this, I'm joined by our Politics
Monday panel, Amy Walter of
The Cook Political Report, and
joining us tonight from New
Hampshire, Tamara Keith of
NPR.
Tam, you're on the trail, so
we're going to start with you.
Let's start by saying farewell
today to Lindsey Graham. What
did he or not bring to this
race?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Lindsey Graham was the
hawkish candidate on defense.
He also was in favor of
immigration reform,
comprehensive immigration
reform, including
a path to citizenship, which is
-- what he was selling is
basically not what primary
voters were buying on the
Republican side this time
around.
And I just have a quick story
from New Hampshire, from --
about a month ago, I was here.
And
I was here to cover a Donald
Trump event at this hotel, and
the line to get into that
event was winding around the
hotel. And then I walk into the
hotel restaurant, and Lindsey
Graham is sitting alone in the
restaurant basically surrounded
by a line of people going
to see Donald Trump.
GWEN IFILL: I had something like
that happen with George~ Pataki
once. I saw him sitting
alone in a restaurant in the
middle of a big moment.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: But that sort of sums it
all up, doesn't it?
GWEN IFILL: It does.
AMY WALTER: Right? The candidate
who came into the race to be the
candidate that at
least is not going to be the
nominee, but at least he wanted
to inject these issues
into the debate.
Now, to be fair, we're talking a
lot about immigration and we're
talking a lot about
national security, but not
necessarily in the ways that
Lindsey Graham would like
Republicans
to be talking about them.
GWEN IFILL: Or perhaps he has a
couple of supporters in North
Carolina who can be of
help to other candidates.
AMY WALTER: Absolutely.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about the
debate, that interesting moment
where, Amy, Bernie Sanders
and Hillary Clinton kind
of kissed and made up.
What was that?
AMY WALTER: Yes.
Well, I think it was a very
smart decision for Bernie
Sanders' campaign to stop this
controversy before it even
began. This started late on
Friday, where the DNC said,
we're
cutting off access to the Bernie
Sanders campaign to our joint
voter file database because
there
is evidence that his campaign
accessed Hillary Clinton's data
and may be holding on to it
right now.
There was a kerfuffle. Got a
little dramatic. They since have
worked things out. It's not
completely over at this point,
but I think it was smart for the
Sanders' campaign, which
is -- and Sanders himself, who
positioned himself as honest and
authentic, and just
come right out and say, listen,
I apologize, it's not who we
are. Let's go talk about the
issues that we know he wants to
talk about, income equality.
GWEN IFILL: Well, Tam, let's
talk about what the distinction
between what the candidates
say and what their staffs say,
because there was some really
harsh rhetoric being exchanged
among the staff that wasn't as
sweet and apple pie as what
happened between Bernie Sanders
and Hillary Clinton on stage.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely.
That harsh rhetoric was in full
force in the spin room before
and after the debate. And,
in fact, just because the
candidates out on stage said
sorry and I accept, more or
less,
just within the last hour, I got
an e-mail from Sanders' campaign
manager, a new statement,
calling on the Clinton campaign
to support that independent
review.
So, the Sanders' campaign isn't
really letting this go, and I
think this Clinton campaign
isn't really letting it go
either. And the remarkable thing
about the Sanders campaign
is that campaign got access to
and took data that wasn't theirs
and they have remarkably
turned it around and made it the
establishment, the Democratic
National Committee trying to
keep Sanders down.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask you, Tam.
What's true and what's not and
does it matter? It's a
pretty obscure fight.
TAMARA KEITH: It's an extremely
obscure fight. Most people
didn't even know that this voter
file existed. And even fewer
people have any idea how it
works.
There is a very small select
people that know how it works.
But it does -- the theft
potentially
of data does create this image
of sort of cloak and dagger
politics that we sort of
imagine when we think of
underhanded politics.
GWEN IFILL: It's like every bad
movie you have ever seen about
politics out of Hollywood.
AMY WALTER: Well, that is
probably true. But it's actually
more fundamental than that,
which is, this is the voter
information. This is the most
important thing that any
candidate
has, right?
GWEN IFILL: Right.
AMY WALTER: And they all have
something unique about what
their strategy is to win these
two states, especially
Iowa and New Hampshire.
And when another campaign sees
your playbook, that can be very
damaging.
GWEN IFILL: When this becomes a
one-on-one fight between Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders,
standing on the side there was
Martin O'Malley, who seems to
have a hard time getting any
traction on the debate
stage and off, Amy.
AMY WALTER: Well, there's not
really a lane for Bernie
Sanders.
We started this campaign knowing
a couple of things. The
Republican electorate, what
they wanted was very different
than what the Democratic
electorate said they wanted out
of a nominee. Republican
electorate said, we don't like
Washington, we don't like the
establishment, we don't like the
idea of having another Bush
necessarily.
Democrats felt very different.
They liked the idea of
experience. They were very happy
with a Clinton, another Clinton
potentially in the White House,
so not that easy lane
there for Martin O'Malley. And
he hasn't been able to capture
the aspirational message,
like Barack Obama did in 2007
and like Bernie Sanders has been
able to do this time around.
GWEN IFILL: Tamara, both
Republicans and Democrats have
spent a lot of time in this
campaign
talking about America's role in
the world. And on that -- just
on that point, there really
was a distinction to be drawn
between Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders and actually from
the Republicans as well.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, and
also Martin O'Malley.
Both O'Malley and Sanders came
back to this idea a couple of
times in the debate that
Hillary Clinton, they say, may
be a little too quick to support
regime change. And O'Malley
even mentioned Libya
as an example.
And then you take that to the
Republican side, and Marco Rubio
is more in favor of regime
change and wants Assad out,
where Ted Cruz and Rand Paul are
less interventionist. So,
there is a divide and it's
a pretty interesting one.
GWEN IFILL: It is interesting
and it crosses parties.
AMY WALTER: That's the thing.
And it crosses party lines.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
AMY WALTER: It's not often that
you say Hillary Clinton and
Marco Rubio agree on something,
or -- and this is even stranger
-- Ted Cruz and Bernie Sanders
agree more on the role
of America in terms of foreign
policy toward Syria than Hillary
Clinton and the rest of
the field.
GWEN IFILL: Last debate of the
year, finally. And as we get
into the holidays, things kind
of freeze in place.
AMY WALTER: They do.
GWEN IFILL: So, Tamara, what do
you have a sense of is going to
happen next? Or are we
just waiting until mid-January,
when everybody gets revved up
again?
TAMARA KEITH: I think it will be
a little bit before mid-January,
but, yes, I think
that things do sort
of freeze in place.
And the real question for Bernie
Sanders becomes, can he win New
Hampshire? And that -- the
polls show it's close. And can
he win Iowa? That's less close.
He's going to be working
very hard in both of those
states, because they are
critical to him making a case
that
he is a strong opponent
to Hillary Clinton.
GWEN IFILL: Amy?
AMY WALTER: And on the
Republican side, I think going
into the end of this year, Ted
Cruz looks like the front-runner
at this point. I would argue the
person...
GWEN IFILL: The
person -- well...
AMY WALTER: Yes. I would say the
person that is best positioned,
how about that, to...
GWEN IFILL: To take down
the actual front-runner?
AMY WALTER: To take down the
person who is at the front of
the national poll, yes, named
Donald Trump.
GWEN IFILL: You don't consider
Donald Trump to be the
front-runner?
AMY WALTER: I consider him to be
a front-runner, but I do not
consider him to be likely to
be the nominee.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
I have a challenge for both of
you for the post-Christmas
Politics Monday. Put on your
Santa hats. You can put your
Santa sweaters away. I know you
planned to where them tonight.
And tell us what happens during
this little hammocked period
between Christmas and New
Year's.
You don't have to answer me now.
Going to come back to you with
that again next Monday.
Give you some time
to think about it.
AMY WALTER: All right.
GWEN IFILL: Have a happy
holiday, both of you.
AMY WALTER: Thank you.
TAMARA KEITH: Happy holidays.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": The
Obama administration protects
two breeds of African lions;
what
a drought revealed in Nevada's
Lake Mead; and Steve Martin's
musical of love and redemption
in the South.
But, first, the demand for
health insurance and concerns
over choice.
The federal government reported
higher demand this year for
people trying to enroll on
insurance
exchanges for coverage. Six
million had signed up by last
week for coverage that begins
next
month. More than two million
of them were new customers.
But, in 11 states, there's one
change that's complicating the
picture this year: Half of
the state-run health co-ops
were forced to shut down.
Special correspondent Mary Jo
Brooks looks at what happened in
Colorado.
MARY JO BROOKS: It's been a
tough year for 36-year-old
Jessica Peck, a Denver attorney
and divorced mother of two. Peck
suffers severe vascular and
neurological ailments which over
the years led to
soaring medical bills.
In 2014, she signed up with a
brand-new health insurance
company called Colorado
HealthOP.
WOMAN: The co-op provides health
insurance that is built around
all needs.
MARY JO BROOKS: It was a
nonprofit co-op formed under the
Affordable Care Act and funded
with
loans from the federal
government. Peck says she chose
it because the price was right.
JESSICA PECK, Colorado: At least
50 percent in terms of premiums
and out-of-pocket co-pays
from the year before.
MARY JO BROOKS: Fifty percent.
JESSICA PECK: Fifty percent. So
this cost saving was a
difference. When I was at my
sickest of being able to pay my
bills, to be able to put gas in
my car, and at one point
having the difference in
premiums was probably the only
thing that kept me afloat.
MARY JO BROOKS: At her sickest
last year, Peck was forced to
have her right leg amputated
and was hospitalized for more
than 23 days. Peck is the first
to admit that the co-op
wasn't perfect, including some
billing errors she is still
trying to sort out. But she was
dismayed when she heard the news
that the co-op was being shut
down.
JESSICA PECK: Now I have to go
back into a marketplace of
players that I have worked
with before, the big, big guys
out there, who hurt me before,
who sent me to collections
on bills, who denied care that
was absolutely 100 percent
essential. And I have to go back
into that marketplace and pay
twice as much as what I'm paying
right now.
Colorado HealthOP was one of 23
co-ops started around the
country as a concession to
Democrats
who wanted the ACA to include an
alternative to private insurers.
Michele Lueck heads up the
policy research group Colorado
Health Institute.
MICHELE LUECK, Colorado Health
Institute: There were a number
of politicians and legislators
who wanted to have a government
choice, something like Medicare
that people could opt into.
And when that wasn't politically
feasible, an olive branch
essentially that was offered
to the left was this idea of
creating co-ops, that this would
be something that was owned
and operated by the people
who needed it the most.
MARY JO BROOKS: Offering some of
the lowest-priced plans in the
state, the co-op quickly became
very popular. By 2015, it had
83,000 policy holders, which
represented 40 percent of all
policies sold on the
Colorado health exchange.
Still, it was tough to compete
against long-established
companies. For one thing, most
of the patients
who signed up with the co-op had
been previously uninsured, which
meant they had greater needs.
CEO Julia Hutchins.
JULIA HUTCHINS, CEO, Colorado
HealthOP: People who signed up
for health insurance in 2014
had a lot of pent-up demand. And
it wasn't hospital care. These
are procedures. When
you're uninsured or underinsured
for a long time and then have
insurance, there is a lot
of care that needs to be
provided. So we spent more on
claims in our first year than we
projected.
MARY JO BROOKS: The government
was supposed to offset costs of
those high-risk patients,
but the Republican-led Congress
sharply curtailed funding. In
October, the administration
announced
it would only be able to pay 13
percent of the $3 billion it
owed insurers across the
country. Colorado HealthOP
was counting on $40 million.
SCOTT LLOYD, Colorado Division
of Insurance: And when that
money did not come in, that's
what really put them under.
MARY JO BROOKS: Scott Lloyd with
the Colorado Division of
Insurance said without the
federal
money, the co-op didn't have
enough capital on hand to be
recertified.
SCOTT LLOYD: If your capital
drops to a certain point, it's
called mandatory control level,
so we're mandated as a state to
take control of an entity when
that capital drops below
that. We can't wait around to
see if it turns are going to
around, because the longer you
wait, the worse the
situation could become.
JULIA HUTCHINS: When we heard
the news, we -- I really felt
sick to my stomach.
MARY JO BROOKS: In spite of the
news, Hutchins was confident
they could raise the needed
money elsewhere. She had three
interested investors, but didn't
have the cash in hand
to meet the insurance deadline.
So at the end of the year, the
co-op will shut down.
Many of the 80 employees have
already begun packing up the
office.
JULIA HUTCHINS: It's unfortunate
that we were part of a health
care program that's been
so politicized. We were
orphaned by politics.
MARY JO BROOKS: Who are
you most angry at?
JULIA HUTCHINS: Obama.
MARY JO BROOKS: Why?
JULIA HUTCHINS: Because so many
different ways that the
administration made the
Affordable
Care Act work, but they really
abandoned the co-op program at
the time when it was most
important.
MARY JO BROOKS: In fact, more
than half of the co-ops
nationwide have announced they
are shutting down. That has left
members scrambling to find new
policies for next year.
At health fairs like this one in
Littleton, Colorado, insurance
companies are trying to
attract those members, but their
higher-cost plans are a tough
sell.
PATRICIA PUTNAM, Colorado:
Everybody has these $6,000,
$7,000 max out of pockets. And
when
you're on disability, you can't
-- you don't have $6,000, $7,000
to pay every year.
MAN: It is a
compromise, isn't it?
PATRICIA PUTNAM: It's not
compromise for me, because I
don't have that.
MARY JO BROOKS: So, what could
the co-ops have done
differently? Michele Lueck says
perhaps they shouldn't have
relied so heavily on the
government.
MICHELE LUECK: Other states,
like Connecticut and New Jersey
and Maine, didn't rely on that
money. They thought that they
had higher premiums to create
the necessary reserves, but they
didn't rely on this promised
payment from the federal
government. And those are the
ones, by and large, that are
still in existence today.
MARY JO BROOKS: But Julia
Hutchins says she's not sure
anything could have helped.
JULIA HUTCHINS: It says
something when you have a local
company who was doing all the
right things and was still able
to offer the lowest cost and
said to be profitable, and
that we couldn't figure out how
to navigate the powers that be
in health insurance to
survive.
It's important to recognize that
this isn't just a co-op story.
This is a small health
plan story. And we really
haven't seen any good solutions
to reduce costs from the big
health plans.
WOMAN: These have
larger premiums.
MARY JO BROOKS: Coloradans will
get another chance to experiment
with an alternative health
insurance plan next November,
when they vote on a ballot
measure that would create a
statewide
single-payer insurance system.
In Denver, I'm Mary Jo Brooks
for the "PBS NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: Next: The Obama
administration today took steps
in this country to protect
lions in Africa under the
Endangered Species Act.
Jeffrey Brown has that.
JEFFREY BROWN: The U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service listed Central
and West African lions
as endangered, generally
prohibiting importation of lion
trophies from that region into
the
U.S. Lions in Southern and
Eastern Africa are now
classified as threatened, which
will
allow U.S. trophy imports only
under certain conditions.
The move comes five months after
an American hunter killed a lion
named Cecil outside a
national park in Zimbabwe, and
almost five years after U.S.
conservation groups petitioned
for greater protections
for lions.
For more, I am joined by Daniel
Ashe, director of the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service.
And welcome to you.
DANIEL ASHE, Director, U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service: Thank you,
Jeff.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why now? Is it
right to see the killing of
Cecil as a kind of game changer
that galvanized public attention
and now government action?
DANIEL ASHE: Well, we have been
considering the listing of the
lion for more than five
years. We were petitioned under
the Endangered Species Act, so
that's been our responsibility.
And we proposed listing the lion
back in October of 2014, before
the controversy over Cecil
the lion, but Cecil and that
controversy certainly have
galvanized public emotions about
lions
and I think brings us
to where we are today.
JEFFREY BROWN: Advocacy groups
have wondered what took so long.
DANIEL ASHE: Well, we are a
scientific organization. And
we're dealing with what many
scientists
call the sixth mass extinction.
So we have many, many
priorities, a lot of work under
the Endangered Species Act. This
is one of those things. And we
have had lots of comment and
lots of science to pore through.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why would a U.S.
-- explain this to people. Why
would a U.S. law or a
designation have such a big
impact on what happens in Africa
and in what ways would it
have an impact?
DANIEL ASHE: That's one of the
great successes of the U.S.
Endangered Species Act is that
it projects U.S. leadership
into world conservation.
The economy of the United States
oftentimes causes species'
extension and decline. But,
in this case, we can use the
power of the U.S. economy and
our position as a trade leader
to influence conservation
of species like the lion.
JEFFREY BROWN: Explain the
distinction that I mentioned
here between them and the
reasons
for the distinction between
putting some lions on the
endangered list and some on the
threatened
list.
DANIEL ASHE: So, the law allows
us to protect subspecies, as
well as species. And so the
science tells us that there are
two species of lion, one, the
Asiatic line.
What used to be considered
Asiatic lion closely related to
lions in Northern and Western
Africa,
and then another distinct
subspecies in Southern and
Eastern Africa.
JEFFREY BROWN: But why not go
further? Why not go further with
the other species?
DANIEL ASHE: Well, the one
species, Panthera leo leo, is --
only 900 of them remain in
the wild, so severely endangered
and in very small populations.
The other subpopulation, leo
melanochaita, is -- there are
about 17,000 to 20,000 of
them in the wild. So, they're in
better condition. And some of
those populations have actually
been increasing during
the last decade.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, that raises
the question, how dire is the
population problem? What is
the real problem
here at the core?
DANIEL ASHE: Well, at the core,
this problem is human conflict
with lions.
So, we're seeing human and human
economies occupying the same
habitat that lions need
to prosper. And so, as
populations increase and become
more affluent in Africa, we're
seeing more conflict with lion.
And so the future for lion is
bleak at this point in
time and we could be looking at
a future where there is nothing
called a lion in the wild,
unless we take important
actions. And that's what we're
doing today.
JEFFREY BROWN: The hunting
industry, of course, has argued
for a long time that, A,
~hunting
can be controlled, and, B, that
the money that comes from these
hunts provide resources
for conservation in countries
that often do not have enough
money, enough funds.
DANIEL ASHE: And that argument
in general is a good argument.
And we see that here in
the United States, where
hunting, well-regulated and
managed hunting, can ensure
prosperous
wildlife populations.
But I think, in Africa -- and as
we think about the plight of the
lion and the drastic
declines that~ we have seen, I
like to think of a Zimbabwean
proverb that says, until the
side of the lion can be told,
the story of the hunt always
glorifies the hunter.
And what we need to do in the
United States is, we need to do
better. The United States
needs to do better and can do
better. The hunting industry
needs to do better and can
do better. And the American
hunter in particular needs to do
better and can do better. And
our listing today, we think, is
going to provide that kind of
incentive.
JEFFREY BROWN: Daniel Ashe,
director of the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, thanks so
much.
DANIEL ASHE: Thank you, Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As the drought
drags on in the Western part of
the country, Lake Mead
in Nevada is sitting with water
at its lowest point since the
1930s. But there has been
one silver lining of late for
that area: Lake Mead has been
revealing some of its deepest
secrets as the
water levels drop.
Special correspondent Sandra
Hughes has the story.
SANDRA HUGHES: On a cloudy day
in Nevada, this boat and its
passengers launch into Lake
Mead. They're on a treasure
hunt, not for gold or silver,
but history. And it's all
because of the
devastating drought.
JOEL SILVERSTEIN, Diver: The
lake is down almost 150 feet
from when we started diving
it. And what's that's done is,
it's exposed other dive sites to
it.
SANDRA HUGHES: The bathtub ring
around Lake Mead shows how low
the manmade reservoir has
dropped from its high point of
1,220 feet above sea level. Some
30 million people in
the U.S. rely on the water
system from the Western
reservoirs, from Arizona to
California
to Mexico, and some of the
country's most productive
agricultural lands.
Already, communities have been
put on water restrictions. In
Las Vegas, you can not have
grass in your front yard. In Los
Angeles, water prices are going
up and watering is
assigned to certain
days of the week.
But the drought has had an
upside: It's made sights
accessible that were never seen
before.
Because the water level is so
low now, these underwater
history hunters, who are just
recreational
divers, are going to scuba dive
in Lake Mead to see a vintage
B-29 bomber from World War
II that crashed in 1948. The war
was ending, but the bomber was
on a mission when it crashed
into the water at
230 miles an hour.
The crew survived, but the
bomber sank to the bottom.
PATRICK SMITH, Diver: The
instrument they were testing was
considered secret, and so
information about the crash,
although the locals kind of knew
about it, nobody really
knew exactly where or what. The
information was considered
classified until 1998, when
it was declassified. And then
divers began looking for it and
ultimately found it.
Just a few years ago, the
average recreational scuba diver
couldn't visit this site.
SANDRA HUGHES: But the severe
drought level water means
recreational diver Cindy Shaw
(ph) can now see the
wreck for herself
CINDY SHAW, Diver: I'm
just really jazzed.
SANDRA HUGHES: Joel
Silverstein's company has the
only Park Service permit to take
a
limited number of divers to see
the sunken bomber. The National
Park Service wants to
keep the location of the bomber
quiet. Very few people will get
to see what lies below
these waters.
That's because it's been at the
bottom of Lake Mead for almost
70 years and is very
vulnerable. Three of the engines
flew off on impact. Still, there
is so much to see,
where the pilot sat, the control
panel. It's an underwater
chapter of history that cannot
be touched.
JOEL SILVERSTEIN: Some of the
areas are actually made of
fabric and extremely thin
aluminum.
And you could just touch it and
it could pop right in. And so
the goal is to not touch
it at all.
SANDRA HUGHES: What was
the best part about it?
CINDY SHAW: When we first
dropped down, you couldn't see
the whole plane this time. But
we dropped down by that tail.
And the tail is just -- it's
like 12 feet, 15 feet up.
And then you look into the
cockpit and you see the pilot's
seat and the steering wheel
and it's just like, oh, my gosh,
this is where those guys were
when this happened. It's so
cool.
SANDRA HUGHES: It's like
going back in time?
CINDY SHAW: It is. It's like
you're back there, and you're
not just on a plane wreck.
You're
living part of like, wow, here
is where they had to climb out.
This is their legacy.
SANDRA HUGHES: Sometimes, dives
are murky because this is a
lake. Other times, the sun
shines bright enough to reveal a
view of the entire aircraft from
nose to tail.
The B-29 bomber is not the only
artifact that's been revealed by
receding waters. Lake Mead
is a manmade reservoir, formed
after the Depression-era
construction of the Hoover Dam.
It was created
to help serve the Western
United States with water.
When the dam was completed in
1936, areas of Nevada and
Arizona were flooded to store
water, burying entire towns
like St. Thomas, Nevada.
So where we're walking right
now, would we be underwater?
CHRISTIE VANOVER, National Park
Service: At certain points in
the reservoir's history,
this would be a point where
would be underwater.
SANDRA HUGHES: The ruins of what
was originally a Mormon outpost
created by Brigham Young
himself have emerged. St. Thomas
started as a cotton farming
community.
This is the tallest
structure that is left?
CHRISTIE VANOVER: That's right.
There were taller structures
that were constructed back
then, but this is the tallest
remaining structures. This wall
hasn't fallen yet. So, this is
kind
of iconic St. Thomas, and
it's the ice cream parlor.
SANDRA HUGHES: After the Mormons
moved out, prospectors and
outlaws moved in.
CHRISTIE VANOVER, Nevada: The
stories and the history that we
hear, that it was like
an Old West movie. It wasn't
necessarily safe. It was the
guys out here with their guns,
and there was some heavy
drinking. There was
prostitution. There was a mix of
things that
happened in this area.
SANDRA HUGHES: But by the early
1890s, a community had emerged.
Then, in 1936, the Hoover Dam
was completed.
CHRISTIE VANOVER: Most were
opposed to it. They weren't
looking forward to moving up
after everything they had
settled here, the community and
families that they had built
here, but some of them stayed
until the very last end.
SANDRA HUGHES: Then the water
came, and St. Thomas was no
more.
CHRISTIE VANOVER: Some of them
were stubborn and they didn't
want to go.
SANDRA HUGHES: People were paid
for their property, but not
their memories. And as this
drought continues and Lake Mead
recedes, more evidence of a long
buried era may yet be uncovered.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Sandy Hook in Lake Mead, Nevada.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight: Cue
the banjo, as two leading
entertainers make their first
foray into musical theater.
We go back to Jeff, who has our
look at the Broadway-bound
"Bright Star."
JEFFREY BROWN: A good story to
tell and to sing, that's the
idea behind "Bright Star,"
a new musical set in North
Carolina in the 1940s with
flashbacks to the 1920's.
Based on a true story, it
involves hidden identities,
youthful coming of age, tragedy
along with humor, and, of
course, love lost and found. But
unlike most musicals, this
one features a bluegrass-style
band complete with banjo.
Now at Washington, D.C.'s
Kennedy Center after an initial
run in San Diego, it's the
creation
of Steve Martin and
Edie Brickell.
STEVE MARTIN, "Bright Star": We
both grew up on musicals. We
love their emotion and
their melodies, and we got this
brain -- harebrained idea to
write one ourselves.
JEFFREY BROWN:
Let's make a show.
EDIE BRICKELL, "Bright Star": In
the tradition of the ones that
we love so much.
JEFFREY BROWN: You didn't come
to it with much experience, or
any experience.
EDIE BRICKELL: No, just a great
love. And I think, if you pay
attention to what you
love and try to write the way
that you love, then maybe you
will come up with something
that you love and others
will love as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: Steve Martin, now
70, is one of the most acclaimed
entertainers of our
era, a comedian, actor, writer,
and banjo-playing musician.
Edie Brickell, 49, a veteran
singer-songwriter, first rose to
fame in the late 1980s for her
work with the folk rock band New
Bohemians. The two collaborated
on the 2013 Grammy-winning
album "Love Has Come for You." A
follow-up, "So Familiar," the
basis for "Bright Star"
came out this fall.
STEVE MARTIN: And we have loved
really every minute of it.
JEFFREY BROWN: At the Kennedy
Center recently, I asked how the
collaboration works.
EDIE BRICKELL: Every way you can
imagine. But it started out with
Steve sending me his
banjo tunes. And I would just
walk around my kitchen and sing
to them, until I -- until
a song emerged. And...
JEFFREY BROWN: Just walk
around in the kitchen?
EDIE BRICKELL: It was like
somebody turned a projector on
in my mind. I would see images.
And all I had to do was say what
it is that I saw and then make
it rhyme and have rhythm
and melody.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: And you got to
have a musical theater with a
banjo in it?
STEVE MARTIN: My part of the
song was written on the banjo.
And the banjo lays out a certain
way for the melodies to be
played. And -- but I also like
the sound of the banjo for this
musical, because I find the
banjo very evocative. It's not a
bluegrass musical at all.
When you combine the banjo with
the cello and the violin and the
viola, you have the
punctuation of the banjo and
these long, long notes of the
strings, and I think it's a
really
good sound.
JEFFREY BROWN: What is it about
the banjo that you love?
STEVE MARTIN: I find it to be
almost two things
simultaneously, very emotional
and melancholy
and, at the same time,
hard-driving and representing
incredible joy.
JEFFREY BROWN: What was it like
for you to put these songs into
the characters' voices?
EDIE BRICKELL: It's more fun for
me, because I have watched
people all my life. I'm not
a very good dinner companion,
because it's hard for me to pay
attention to the person
in front of me. I'm always
looking at other tables and
making up stories about people
based on their body language.
And I just have always done
that. So, it's great to be given
the opportunity to let that
side of my imagination come
forth and express what I believe
people are feeling and thinking.
JEFFREY BROWN: Steve Martin has
written plays before, but a
musical, the mix of dialogue
and singing, how to convey the
story is a different matter.
STEVE MARTIN: The rule that we
actually went in is, you can't
have two characters fall
in love and talk about it, and
then sing about the same thing.
That's really been fun to
do. It's really about listening
to the audience and trying to
fathom what they're
understanding,
what they're going through, what
they're liking, and what they're
maybe bored by.
JEFFREY BROWN: This idea of
what's conveyed through
language, through words,
dialogue,
and what's conveyed through the
songs, so, falling in love
should happen during the song?
EDIE BRICKELL: Well, I always
loved that you are 16 going on
17 song and that moment that
they're...
JEFFREY BROWN: "The
Sound of Music."
EDIE BRICKELL: Yes. I love it.
That's the one that breaks my
heart, because it's so
beautiful and so
sweet. I love it.
And so I woke up one morning
realizing, we need a song like
that. We need our 16 going
on 17 moment. And so those
little epiphanies helped direct
the sense of writing.
JEFFREY BROWN: There is much
tenderness in "Bright Star." It
has a jarring tragedy at
its core, but also an almost
old- fashioned sweetness.
A lot of our culture today is
not sweet. It's sort of crass
and crude, and it's certainly
loud and fast.
STEVE MARTIN: I think Edie and I
think alike in that regard, is
that want to -- wanted
to make something that was
touching. And we have a very --
that's not to say it's
saccharine,
because we have a very
shocking ending to act one.
I think we both feel that the
shock value through language is
really not that shocking
anymore at all.
EDIE BRICKELL: I have grown
weary of the vulgarity in our
culture, and I wanted to respect
the
innocence that I think still
exists and is alive in all of
us, just to honor it again
and revisit it, with joy and
adulthood. I don't think
adulthood means that you have
to get crude and vulgar.
JEFFREY BROWN: Comedian, actor,
novelist, playwright, musician,
now musical theater.
Is this -- is it a
restless mind or is it...
STEVE MARTIN: No, it's just -- I
think it's just one thing leads
to another. If you write
a play, you think, well, maybe I
can write a play with music, you
know?
JEFFREY BROWN: After its run at
the Kennedy Center, "Bright
Star" heads to Broadway in
February.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Jeffrey Brown.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: remembering the
archaeologist who devoted his
life to
the ancient city of Palmyra.
Khaled Al-Asaad was killed in
August by the Islamic State
after its forces took over the
city. A new poem celebrates his
work uncovering some of
Palmyra's greatest treasures.
You can find it on our home page
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, we will look at some
of the world's geopolitical hot
spots and the challenges
facing the United States
in the year ahead.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.